Doc: Add CSI Migration status update blog post (#30353)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-11-02-csi-migration-status.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.23: Kubernetes In-Tree to CSI Volume Migration Status Update"

> date: 2021-11-03T15:00:00+08:00

Reviewer: This date should be the scheduled publish date of this blog.  You'll need to check with release/doc team on this.

Author: I checked with @karenhchu and it seems the release date for it should be 2021-12-13. I am updating the doc to reflect that.

> slug: kubernetes-1-23-feature-csi-migration-status-update

Reviewer: I think the slug usually does not contain the release version such as "kubernetes-1-23".

---

**Authors:** Jiawei Wang, Software Engineer, Google

> The Kubernetes in-tree storage plugin to [Container Storage Interface (CSI)](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/01/15/container-storage-interface-ga/) migration infrastructure has already been [beta](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/12/09/kubernetes-1-17-feature-csi-migration-beta/) since v1.17. CSI migration was introduced as alpha in Kubernetes v1.14.

Reviewer 2: Not entirely sure but I think these links need to be changed to reference style links for consistency.

```suggestion
The Kubernetes in-tree storage plugin to [Container Storage Interface (CSI)](/blog/2019/01/15/container-storage-interface-ga/) migration infrastructure has already been in [beta](/blog/2019/12/09/kubernetes-1-17-feature-csi-migration-beta/) since v1.17. CSI migration was introduced as alpha in Kubernetes v1.14.
```

Author: Done

Since then, Sig Storage and other Sigs are working extra hard to ensure the feature land in great spots. A lot of effort has been put in by the maintainers of each plugin towards making the CSI Migration feature on by default & generally available for their plugins. This blog is intended to give a status update to the feature as well as changes since Kubernetes 1.17 to 1.23. In addition, it will also cover the future roadmap for the CSI migration feature GA for each storage plugins.

## Quick recap: What is CSI Migration and Why?

> [Container Storage Interface](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/01/15/container-storage-interface-ga/) has been GA since Kubernetes v1.13. CSI volume plugin was introduced to make Kubernetes volume plugins more maintainable and truly extensible. It is designed to replace the in-tree storage plugin especially vendor specific plugins for better maintainability(independent release cycle and support) as well as less vulnerability(security/reliability bugs can exist).

Reviewer 2: Same here
```suggestion
[Container Storage Interface](/blog/2019/01/15/container-storage-interface-ga/) has been GA since Kubernetes v1.13. CSI volume plugin was introduced to make Kubernetes volume plugins more maintainable and truly extensible. It is designed to replace the in-tree storage plugin especially vendor specific plugins for better maintainability(independent release cycle and support) as well as less vulnerability(security/reliability bugs can exist).
```

Author: Done

> As more CSI Drivers were created and became production ready, we wanted all Kubernetes users to benefit from the CSI model. However, we did not want to force users into making workload/configuration changes by breaking the existing generally available storage APIs. The way forward was clear - we would have to replace the backend of the “in-tree plugin” APIs with CSI and make the existing storage API/Interface working as usual.

Author: Thanks! I made some clarification here.

> The CSI migration effort enables the replacement of existing in-tree storage plugins such as `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` or `kubernetes.io/aws-ebs` with a corresponding [CSI driver](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/introduction.html) from the storage backend. If CSI Migration is working properly, Kubernetes end users shouldn’t notice a difference. When a Kubernetes cluster administrator updates a cluster to enable CSI migration, existing stateful deployments and workloads continue to function as they always have; however, behind the scenes Kubernetes hands control of all storage management operations (previously targeting in-tree drivers) to CSI drivers.

Author: The intention here is to state that existing workloads(deployment or statefulset) that utilize PVC that is backed by in-tree storage plugins will still work properly.

> The CSI migration effort enables the replacement of existing in-tree storage plugins such as `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` or `kubernetes.io/aws-ebs` with a corresponding [CSI driver](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/introduction.html) from the storage backend. If CSI Migration is working properly, Kubernetes end users shouldn’t notice a difference. When a Kubernetes cluster administrator updates a cluster to enable CSI migration, existing stateful deployments and workloads continue to function as they always have; however, behind the scenes Kubernetes hands control of all storage management operations (previously targeting in-tree drivers) to CSI drivers.

Author: I am rephrasing to hopefully make this clear.

> The CSI migration effort enables the replacement of existing in-tree storage plugins such as `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` or `kubernetes.io/aws-ebs` with a corresponding [CSI driver](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/introduction.html) from Kubernetes backend. If CSI Migration is working properly, Kubernetes end users shouldn’t notice a difference. When a Kubernetes cluster administrator updates a cluster to enable CSI migration, existing stateful deployments and workloads continue to function as they always have; however, behind the scenes Kubernetes hands control of all storage management operations (previously targeting in-tree drivers) to CSI drivers.

Reviewer: Kubernetes backend -> the storage backend

> For example, Suppose you are a `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` user, after CSI migration, you can still use `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` to provision new volumes, mount existing GCE-PD volumes or delete existing volumes. All existing API/Interface will still function correctly. However, the underlying function calls are all going through the [GCE PD CSI driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gcp-compute-persistent-disk-csi-driver) instead of the in-tree Kubernetes function.

Reviewer 3: nit: `suppose`

This enables a smooth transition for end users. Additionally as storage plugin developers, we can reduce the burden of maintaining the in-tree storage plugins and eventually remove them from the core Kubernetes binary.

## What has been changed and What's new?

Since Kubernetes v1.17, there are some new changes introduced:

> ### New Feature Gate

Reviewer 3: While this section does a good job explaining both gates, IMO it'd be even better if we reorganize it to jump straight to the point in the first paragraph. Perhaps moving the last paragraph up here would help.

> `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` was introduced in before as a supplementary feature gate to enable once CSI migration is enabled on all of the nodes. This flag will de-register the in-tree storage plugin and directly translate the traffic to CSI driver without any checking if CSI migration is enabled on the node.

Reviewer: was introduced in -> was introduced
Suggest remove "to enable".

> While this feature gate is a great helper, we would also like a feature gate that can disable in-tree storage plugin without CSI migration enabled. For example, we would like to disable ebs storage plugin on a GKE cluster because it does not have ability to provision EBS volume. Thus, a new feature flag `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` is introduced in kubernetes v1.21.

Reviewer 3: nit: capital `ebs`

`InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` is a standalone feature gate that can be enabled and disabled out of CSI Migration scope. The name speaks for itself, when enabled, the component will not register the specific in-tree storage plugin to the supported list. If the cluster operator only enables this flag, end users will get an error from PVC saying it cannot find the plugin when the plugin is used. The cluster operator may want to enable this regardless of CSI Migration if they do not want to support the legacy in-tree APIs and only support CSI moving forward.

> At the same time, `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` was deprecated and removed in kubernetes v1.21 as well. The `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` will replace the old feature flag but remain all the functionality that `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` provides.

Reviewer: remain -> keep

### Observability

> We have added the [CSI Migration Metrics](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/98279) support for better observability of the feature. This will also help us discover any potential issues regarding the feature.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.FIXE introduced [metrics](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/98279) for tracking CSI migration.
You can use these metrics to observe how your cluster is using storage services and whether access to that storage is using the legacy in-tree driver or its CSI-based replacement.
```

- storage_operation_duration_seconds
  - This metric is exposed from the Kube-Controller-Manager. A new field `migrated` is added to the metric to indicate whether this storage operation is a CSI migration operation.
- csi_sidecar_operations_seconds
  - This metric is exposed from the CSI sidecars(csi-provisioner, csi-attacher, csi-resizer). A new field `migrated` is added to the metric to indicate whether this storage operation is a CSI migration operation.
- csi_kubelet_operations_seconds

>   - This metric is exposed from Kubelet. It exposes CSI operation, driver name, status and `migrated` field to indicate whether this storage operation is a CSI migration operation.

Reviewer 4: I'd write this as a table (in HTML), with a column for the component name, a column for the metric name, and a column for notes. Plus headings, `<tbody>`, etc.
In the notes, maybe list the common _labels_ (not fields) such as `migrated`. Either link to the reference docs for these metrics, or also explain the values for `migrated` (I presume: `0.0` or `1.0`, but it might be present / absent - I don't know!).

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! I changed it to a table.

>   - This metric is exposed from Kubelet. It exposes CSI operation, driver  name, status and `migrated` field to indicate whether this storage operation is a CSI migration operation.

Reviewer: Extra space in "driver  name".

### Bug fixes and feature improvement

> We have been able to identify bugs like dangling attachment, garbage collecting, incorrect topology label ... and we have fixed all of them to make the feature more health.

Reviewer: garbage collecting -> garbage collection
more health -> more healthy

### Cloud Provider && Cluster Lifecycle Collaboration

> We, SIG Storage, have been working closely with SIG CloudProvider and SIG ClusterLifeCycle to provide a better experience for the feature launching.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
SIG Storage have been working closely with SIG Cloud Provider and SIG Cluster Lifecycle on the rollout of CSI migration.
```

> If you are a user of public cloud provider managed Kubernetes service like GKE, EKS, AKS, there is nothing required to be done from your end. The cloud providers will manage the feature gate and ensure the feature lands correctly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you are a user of public cloud provider managed Kubernetes service (such as AKS, EKS, or GKE) there is nothing required to be done from your end. Your cloud provider should manage the control plane configuration for you and make a seamless migration possible.
```

alphabetical order for third party products / services please (or you can pick a random order using a fair entropy source)
We also don't guarantee that every cloud provider with an in-tree plugin is competent at running their service - I'm sure they are, but that's not a promise _we_ make.

> If you are a user of some other kubernetes distribution services, check the official documentations to get support for the feature. We have communicated with the Sig-ClusterLifeCycle to request early planning for CSI Migration GA and they have been working hard to ensure a smooth experience.

Author: This is the correct understanding! Thanks!

> If you are a user of some other kubernetes distribution services, check the official documentations to get support for the feature. We have communicate with the Sig-ClusterLifeCycle to request early planing for CSI Migration GA and they have been working hard to ensure a smooth experience.

Reviewer: communicate -> communicated
early planing -> early planning

> If you are a user of some other kubernetes distribution services, check the official documentations to get support for the feature. For the CSI Migration feature graduation to GA, we are coordinating with SIG ClusterLifeCycle towards requesting an early planning & they have been working hard to ensure a smooth experience.

Reviewer: & -> and

> If you are a user of some other kubernetes distribution services, check the official documentations to get support for the feature. For the CSI Migration feature graduation to GA, we are coordinating with SIG ClusterLifeCycle towards requesting an early planning & they have been working hard to ensure a smooth experience.

Reviewer 4: If you use a distribution of Kubernetes, check its official documentation for information about support for ths feature. For the CSI Migration feature graduation to GA, SIG Storage and SIG Cluster Lifecycle are collaborating towards making the migration mechanisms available in tooling (such as `kubeadm`) as soon as they're available in Kubernetes itself.
```

## What is the timeline/status?

> The current and targeted releases for each individual cloud driver is shown in the table below:

Reviewer: Some of the drivers listed below are not for cloud providers.  So "cloud driver" -> "driver"

| Driver           | Alpha | Beta (in-tree deprecated) | Beta (on-by-default) | GA            | Target "in-tree plugin" removal |
| ---------------- | ----- | ------------------------- | -------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------- |
| AWS EBS          | 1.14  | 1.17                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| GCE PD           | 1.14  | 1.17                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| OpenStack Cinder | 1.14  | 1.18                      | 1.21                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| Azure Disk       | 1.15  | 1.19                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| Azure File       | 1.15  | 1.21                      | 1.24 (Target)        | 1.25 (Target) | 1.27 (Target)                   |

> | vSphereVolume    | 1.18  | 1.19                      | 1.24 (Target)        | 1.25 (Target) | 1.27 (Target)                   |

Reviewer 5: These are listed as GA in 1.24 in https://docs.google.com/document/d/1j6uF9sOoGCQ9nNFVrdvCWyn77o9k3-758qsEj2K3BAY/edit#. Can you please update the doc?

Author: Done

> | vSphereVolume    | 1.18  | 1.19                      | 1.24 (Target)        | 1.25 (Target) | 1.27 (Target)                   |

Reviewer 4: Given the other drivers' names are written out as phrases, I'd change `vSphereVolume` to `vSphere`.

> | VSphere           | 1.18          | 1.19                      | 1.23 (Potentially miss)| 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |

Reviewer: The blog will be published after 1.23 is released so "(Potentially miss)" can be removed.

Author: I will remove it for now and wait for the final status of vSphere to see if this need to be changed.

> | VSphere           | 1.18          | 1.19                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |

Author: Done

| Ceph RBD         | 1.23  |
| Portworx         | 1.23  |

> The following drivers will not have CSI migration support and will be deprecated and removed from the core Kubernetes.

Reviewer 4: As these are all already deprecated, let's phrase this text to make that clear.

| Driver    | Deprecated | Code Removal  |
| --------- | ---------- | ------------- |
| StorageOS | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |
| ScaleIO   | 1.16       | 1.22          |
| Flocker   | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |
| Quobyte   | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |

## What's next?

> With more CSI drivers graduating to GA, we will soon mark the overall CSI Migration feature as GA. We are expecting cloud provider in-tree storage plugins code removal to happen by Kubernetes v1.26.

Reviewer: some are by 1.27

> With more CSI drivers come to Migration GA, we will soon mark the overall CSI Migration feature as GA. We are expecting cloud provider in-tree storage plugins code removal to happen by Kubernetes v1.26.

Reviewer 6: Possible rephrase.

With more CSI drivers graduating to GA, we will soon mark the overall CSI Migration feature as GA.

## What should I do as a user?

Note that all new features for the Kubernetes storage system (like volume snapshotting) will only be added to the CSI interface. Therefore, if you are starting up a new cluster, creating stateful applications for the first time, or require these new features we recommend using CSI drivers natively (instead of the in-tree volume plugin API). Follow the [updated user guides for CSI drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/drivers.html) and use the new CSI APIs.

> However, if you choose to roll a cluster forward or continue using specifications with the legacy volume APIs, CSI Migration will ensure we continue to support those deployments with the new CSI drivers. However, if you want to leverage new features like snapshot, it will require a manual migration to translate the in-tree PV spec to CSI.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "manual migration"?  Does that involve ensuring the reclaim policy is retain, deleting the PVC/PV objects, and re-importing volumes by static provisioning?

Author: Yes. I added another sentence to explain this.

> However, if you choose to roll a cluster forward or continue using specifications with the legacy volume APIs, CSI Migration will ensure we continue to support those deployments with the new CSI drivers. However, if you want to leverage new features like snapshot, it will require a manual migration to translate the in-tree PV spec to CSI, this might involves operations like change reclaim policy, deleting PV/PVC object and re-import volumes by static provisioning.

Reviewer: change reclaim policy -> changing reclaim policy to `Retain`

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.23: Kubernetes In-Tree to CSI Volume Migration Status Update"

> date: 2021-12-13T12:00:00+08:00

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
date: 2021-12-13
```
(Hugo doesn't recognize the format used right now)

Reviewer 4: Actually, ignore that. Hugo does recognize it.

For example, suppose you are a `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` user, after CSI migration, you can still use `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` to provision new volumes, mount existing GCE-PD volumes or delete existing volumes. All existing API/Interface will still function correctly. However, the underlying function calls are all going through the [GCE PD CSI driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gcp-compute-persistent-disk-csi-driver) instead of the in-tree Kubernetes function.

This enables a smooth transition for end users. Additionally as storage plugin developers, we can reduce the burden of maintaining the in-tree storage plugins and eventually remove them from the core Kubernetes binary.

## What has been changed and What's new?

Building on the work done in Kubernetes v1.17 and earler, the releases since then have
made a series of changes:

### New Feature Gate

The Kubernetes v1.21 release deprecated the `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` feature flags, and stopped honoring them. In their place came new feature flags named `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister`, that replace the old feature flag and retain all the functionality that `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` provided.

> `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` was introduced before as a supplementary feature gate once CSI migration is enabled on all of the nodes. This flag will de-register the in-tree storage plugin and directly translate the traffic to CSI driver without any checking if CSI migration is enabled on the node.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`CSIMigration{provider}Complete` was introduced before as a supplementary feature gate once CSI migration is enabled on all of the nodes. This flag will unregister the in-tree storage plugin and directly translate the traffic to CSI driver without any checking if CSI migration is enabled on the node.
```

> While this feature gate is a great helper, we would also like a feature gate that can disable in-tree storage plugin without CSI migration enabled. For example, we would like to disable EBS storage plugin on a GKE cluster because it does not have ability to provision EBS volume. Thus, a new feature flag `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` was introduced in kubernetes v1.21.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
While this feature gate is a great helper, we would also like a feature gate that can disable in-tree storage plugin without CSI migration enabled. For example, we would like to disable EBS storage plugin on a GCE cluster because it does not have ability to provision EBS volume. Thus, a new feature flag `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` was introduced in kubernetes v1.21.
```

> `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` is a standalone feature gate that can be enabled and disabled out of CSI Migration scope. The name speaks for itself, when enabled, the component will not register the specific in-tree storage plugin to the supported list. If the cluster operator only enables this flag, end users will get an error from PVC saying it cannot find the plugin when the plugin is used. The cluster operator may want to enable this regardless of CSI Migration if they do not want to support the legacy in-tree APIs and only support CSI moving forward.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` is a standalone feature gate that can be enabled and disabled independently from CSI Migration. When enabled, the component will not register the specific in-tree storage plugin to the supported list. If the cluster operator only enables this flag, end users will get an error from PVC saying it cannot find the plugin when the plugin is used. The cluster operator may want to enable this regardless of CSI Migration if they do not want to support the legacy in-tree APIs and only support CSI moving forward.
```

| Components                                   | Metrics                            | Notes                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| -------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Kube-Controller-Manager                      | storage_operation_duration_seconds | A new label `migrated` is added to the metric to indicate whether this storage operation is a CSI migration operation(`True` for enabled and `False` for not enabled).                 |
| Kubelet                                      | csi_operations_seconds             | The new metric exposes labels including `driver_name`, `method_name`, `grpc_status_code` and `migrated`. The meaning of these labels is identical to `csi_sidecar_operations_seconds`. |

> | CSI Sidecars(provisioner, attacher, resizer) | csi_sidecar_operations_seconds     | A new label `migrated` is added to the metric to indicate whether this storage operation is a CSI migration operation(`True` for enabled and `False` for not enabled).                 |

Reviewer 4: OpenMetrics [doesn't have](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#data-model) native Boolean values. Let's clarify that the values are `0` and `1` (or `0.0` and `1.1`) at the metrics endpoint) - assuming I'm right here.

Author: I took another look and it seems we were using string value true and false. Updated the doc

### Bug fixes and feature improvement

> We have been able to identify bugs like dangling attachment, garbage collection, incorrect topology label ... and we have fixed all of them to make the feature more healthy.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
We have fixed numerous bugs like dangling attachment, garbage collection, incorrect topology label through the help of our beta testers.
```

### Cloud Provider && Cluster Lifecycle Collaboration

> SIG Storage have been working closely with SIG Cloud Provider and SIG Cluster Lifecycle on the rollout of CSI migration.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
SIG Storage has been working closely with SIG Cloud Provider and SIG Cluster Lifecycle on the rollout of CSI migration.
```

> If you are a user of public cloud provider managed Kubernetes service (such as AKS, EKS, or GKE) there is nothing required to be done from your end. Your cloud provider should manage the control plane configuration for you and make a seamless migration possible.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If you are a user of a managed Kubernetes service, check with your provider if anything needs to be done. In many cases, the provider will manage the migration and no additional work is required.
```

| Azure Disk       | 1.15  | 1.19                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| Azure File       | 1.15  | 1.21                      | 1.24 (Target)        | 1.25 (Target) | 1.27 (Target)                   |
| vSphere          | 1.18  | 1.19                      | 1.24 (Target)        | 1.25 (Target) | 1.27 (Target)                   |
| Ceph RBD         | 1.23  |
| Portworx         | 1.23  |

The following drivers will not have CSI migration support and are deprecated and will be removed from the core Kubernetes.

| Driver    | Deprecated | Code Removal  |
| --------- | ---------- | ------------- |
| ScaleIO   | 1.16       | 1.22          |
| Flocker   | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |
| Quobyte   | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |
| StorageOS | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |

## What's next?

With more CSI drivers graduating to GA, we will soon mark the overall CSI Migration feature as GA. We are expecting cloud provider in-tree storage plugins code removal to happen by Kubernetes v1.26 and v1.27.

## What should I do as a user?

> Note that all new features for the Kubernetes storage system (like volume snapshotting) will only be added to the CSI interface. Therefore, if you are starting up a new cluster, creating stateful applications for the first time, or require these new features we recommend using CSI drivers natively (instead of the in-tree volume plugin API). Follow the [updated user guides for CSI drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/drivers.html) and use the new CSI APIs.

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
Note that all new features for the Kubernetes storage system (such as volume snapshotting) will only be added to the CSI interface. Therefore, if you are starting up a new cluster, creating stateful applications for the first time, or require these new features we recommend using CSI drivers natively (instead of the in-tree volume plugin API). Follow the updated [user guides for CSI drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/drivers.html) and use the new CSI APIs.
```

> However, if you choose to roll a cluster forward or continue using specifications with the legacy volume APIs, CSI Migration will ensure we continue to support those deployments with the new CSI drivers. However, if you want to leverage new features like snapshot, it will require a manual migration to translate the in-tree PV spec to CSI, this might involves operations like changing reclaim policy to `Retain`, deleting PV/PVC object and re-import volumes by static provisioning.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
However, if you choose to roll a cluster forward or continue using specifications with the legacy volume APIs, CSI Migration will ensure we continue to support those deployments with the new CSI drivers. However, if you want to leverage new features like snapshot, it will require a manual migration to re-import an existing intree PV as a CSI PV.
```

When a Kubernetes cluster administrator updates a cluster to enable CSI migration, existing workloads that utilize PVCs which are backed by in-tree storage plugins will continue to function as they always have. 
However, behind the scenes, Kubernetes hands control of all storage management operations (previously targeting in-tree drivers) to CSI drivers.

For example, suppose you are a `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` user, after CSI migration, you can still use `kubernetes.io/gce-pd` to provision new volumes, mount existing GCE-PD volumes or delete existing volumes. All existing API/Interface will still function correctly. However, the underlying function calls are all going through the [GCE PD CSI driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gcp-compute-persistent-disk-csi-driver) instead of the in-tree Kubernetes function.

This enables a smooth transition for end users. Additionally as storage plugin developers, we can reduce the burden of maintaining the in-tree storage plugins and eventually remove them from the core Kubernetes binary.

> ## What has been changed and What's new?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## What has been changed, and what's new?
```

> Building on the work done in Kubernetes v1.17 and earler, the releases since then have

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
Building on the work done in Kubernetes v1.17 and earlier, the releases since then have
```

made a series of changes:

> ### New Feature Gate

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### New feature gates
```

The Kubernetes v1.21 release deprecated the `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` feature flags, and stopped honoring them. In their place came new feature flags named `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister`, that replace the old feature flag and retain all the functionality that `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` provided.

> `CSIMigration{provider}Complete` was introduced before as a supplementary feature gate once CSI migration is enabled on all of the nodes. This flag will unregister the in-tree storage plugin and directly translate the traffic to CSI driver without any checking if CSI migration is enabled on the node.

Reviewer 4: Is this right?
```suggestion
`CSIMigration{provider}Complete` was introduced before as a supplementary feature gate once CSI migration is enabled on all of the nodes. This flag unregisters the in-tree storage plugin you specify with the `{provider}` part of the flag name.
When you enable that feature gate, then instead of using the in-tree driver code, your cluster directly selects and uses the relevant CSI driver. This happens without any check for whether CSI migration is enabled on the node, or whether you have in fact deployed that CSI driver.
```

Author: yes

> While this feature gate is a great helper, we would also like a feature gate that can disable in-tree storage plugin without CSI migration enabled. For example, we would like to disable EBS storage plugin on a GCE cluster because it does not have ability to provision EBS volume. Thus, a new feature flag `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister` was introduced in kubernetes v1.21.

Reviewer 4: Wording nit:
```suggestion
While this feature gate is a great helper, SIG Storage (and, I'm sure, lots of cluster operators) also wanted a feature gate that lets you disable an in-tree storage plugin, even without also enabling CSI migration. For example, you might want to disable the EBS storage plugin on a GCE cluster, because EBS volumes are specific to a different vendor's cloud (AWS).

To make this possible, Kubernetes v1.21 introduced a new feature flag set: `InTreePlugin{vendor}Unregister`.
```

| CSI Sidecars(provisioner, attacher, resizer) | csi_sidecar_operations_seconds     | A new label `migrated` is added to the metric to indicate whether this storage operation is a CSI migration operation(string value `true` for enabled and `false` for not enabled).    |

### Bug fixes and feature improvement

We have fixed numerous bugs like dangling attachment, garbage collection, incorrect topology label through the help of our beta testers.

### Cloud Provider && Cluster Lifecycle Collaboration

SIG Storage has been working closely with SIG Cloud Provider and SIG Cluster Lifecycle on the rollout of CSI migration.

If you are a user of a managed Kubernetes service, check with your provider if anything needs to be done. In many cases, the provider will manage the migration and no additional work is required.

If you use a distribution of Kubernetes, check its official documentation for information about support for ths feature. For the CSI Migration feature graduation to GA, SIG Storage and SIG Cluster Lifecycle are collaborating towards making the migration mechanisms available in tooling (such as kubeadm) as soon as they're available in Kubernetes itself.

> ## What is the timeline/status?

Reviewer 4: tiny nit:
```suggestion
## What is the timeline / status? {#timeline-and-status}
```
(changes the fragment identifier only)

The current and targeted releases for each individual driver is shown in the table below:

| Driver           | Alpha | Beta (in-tree deprecated) | Beta (on-by-default) | GA            | Target "in-tree plugin" removal |
| ---------------- | ----- | ------------------------- | -------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------- |
| AWS EBS          | 1.14  | 1.17                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| GCE PD           | 1.14  | 1.17                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| OpenStack Cinder | 1.14  | 1.18                      | 1.21                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| Azure Disk       | 1.15  | 1.19                      | 1.23                 | 1.24 (Target) | 1.26 (Target)                   |
| Azure File       | 1.15  | 1.21                      | 1.24 (Target)        | 1.25 (Target) | 1.27 (Target)                   |
| vSphere          | 1.18  | 1.19                      | 1.24 (Target)        | 1.25 (Target) | 1.27 (Target)                   |
| Ceph RBD         | 1.23  |
| Portworx         | 1.23  |

> The following drivers will not have CSI migration support and are deprecated and will be removed from the core Kubernetes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following storage technologies and their drivers will not have CSI migration support. The ScaleIO driver was already removed; the others are deprecated and will be removed from core Kubernetes.
```

| Driver    | Deprecated | Code Removal  |
| --------- | ---------- | ------------- |
| ScaleIO   | 1.16       | 1.22          |
| Flocker   | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |
| Quobyte   | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |
| StorageOS | 1.22       | 1.25 (Target) |

## What's next?

> With more CSI drivers graduating to GA, we will soon mark the overall CSI Migration feature as GA. We are expecting cloud provider in-tree storage plugins code removal to happen by Kubernetes v1.26 and v1.27.

Reviewer 4: nit; I recommend only making a commitment (even a vague one like soon) if there's a project commitment to do that exact thing.
```suggestion
With more CSI drivers graduating to GA, we hope to soon mark the overall CSI Migration feature as GA. We are expecting cloud provider in-tree storage plugins code removal to happen by Kubernetes v1.26 and v1.27.
```

## What should I do as a user?

Note that all new features for the Kubernetes storage system (such as volume snapshotting) will only be added to the CSI interface. Therefore, if you are starting up a new cluster, creating stateful applications for the first time, or require these new features we recommend using CSI drivers natively (instead of the in-tree volume plugin API). Follow the [updated user guides for CSI drivers](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/drivers.html) and use the new CSI APIs.

However, if you choose to roll a cluster forward or continue using specifications with the legacy volume APIs, CSI Migration will ensure we continue to support those deployments with the new CSI drivers. However, if you want to leverage new features like snapshot, it will require a manual migration to re-import an existing intree PV as a CSI PV.

## How do I get involved?

> The Kubernetes Slack channel csi-migration along with any of the standard [SIG Storage communication channels](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-storage/README.md#contact) are great mediums to reach out to the SIG Storage and migration working group teams.

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
The Kubernetes Slack channel [#csi-migration](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/csi-migration) along with any of the standard [SIG Storage communication channels](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-storage/README.md#contact) are great mediums to reach out to the SIG Storage and migration working group teams.
```
